My comments on choosing a backpack for hiking.

- One thing you should consider is the size of backpack you'll need. If you're doing overnight trips, you'll need a large pack, such as 70L or 80L. If you only intend to use it for day trips, then I think 40L should suffice. Bear in mind that I lean towards larger bags than smaller in general, especially if the bag is lightweight, although you might prefer smaller. I just find crammed bags to be annoying to deal with.
- You should also consider getting a rain protector for it. This is less important if you plan to stay clear of hiking on rainy days, but it's still important to bring for preparation. It not only helps by keeping your stuff dry inside the backpack, but as the bag gets saturated with water, it gets heavier, so this is prevented, too.
- I prefer top-loading packs (this seems to be the general sentiment, too, as this comes up often in blog posts). It's just easier to load and access your stuff than front-loading packs are. I only see front-loading packs to be useful if you intend to access your stuff like you would a suitcase -- by putting the back down, and opening the entire front. I almost never do this -- I almost always access the pack in an up-right position.
- A feature of backpacks that I think is underrated is airflow between your back and the backpack. I feel very strongly about this! If the back is flat, then it's going to sit right up against your back, and this area will get soaking wet from sweat. I actually look for this feature for my everyday backpack (which I've given up separating from my hiking backpack -- except for my MDS back at UBC which I treat as a laptop bag!)
- I don't like zippers. They almost always fail (zipper loses connection with other side; bindings come apart; zipper bites on fabric; etc.). I look for a drawstring, or just recently, I've taken to the style present on "dry bags" that involve folding over the top, and buckling the ends together -- for example, here: https://www.mec.ca/en/product/5030-654/Nano-3D-Dry-Bag
- Speaking of dry bags, they're quite handy if you want to ensure that something stays dry (like clothing or electronics). They're good for organization within your backpack, especially if they are compressable, like this one: https://www.amazon.com/Waterproof-Backpack-Supersingularity-Inflation-Compression/dp/B017GEVUIS. You can close the sack, open the valve, let the air out by compressing the sack, and then close the valve. Great for saving space!
- I prefer bags with relatively few pouches, though this is just personal preference. When there are too many pouches, I find it difficult to remember where I put things.
- A spot to put hiking poles can be useful -- they're no use if the trail becomes too gnarly, so you want to be able to put them away -- especially pertinent if your bag is small, or your poles don't collapse.
